Last week I went to Open Knowledge Foundation Deutschland headquarters (in Berlin) and gave a talk about Dat. While I was there, they asked me some questions about how to run an open source project. I spoke to the Prototype Fund about open source projects, human-centered design, and the strengths as well as pitfalls of public funding.

Take three minutes and watch the finished product here:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/TF53JpXJlcY" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

There's some truth to the idea that most good open source is just trying things out and seeing if they'll stick. Open source is about having the courage to fail, fail hard, and fail publicly. It's about leveraging your community by listening to others, and even if you disagree with them, trusting that they might be right in the end. Open source has taught me humility better than anything else I've done in my life.

The truth is that having a supportive community is key. I'd never be able to do this work without the help of my colleagues, friendly internet strangers, and chatty IRC channels. I'm very grateful to have very supportive and friendly folks around me that encourage the best work. Don't settle for less. Don't settle for assholes. But, when they show up, try to brush them off your shoulder and lean on your friends for support. Just don't be afraid to publish and test early and often. That's the key to long-lasting, well-tested, and community-driven open source software.

What most people don't talk about in open source is money. Who gets paid to do this work? Is it all volunteer? What organizations are maintaining this code, and how are they funded? Many people used to think that open source just appears out of thin air from the goodness of volunteers, but the cold reality is that people need to eat. To have good open source, we need to pay people for it. There should be easy ways to support and contribute to folks who are already doing great work in open source. There also should be easy ways to get started in open source, even if you haven't done it before. This is why I love initiatives like the Prototype Fund. It makes me to know that open source contributors will be supported financially to build things that we all need.

I hope you apply to the prototype fund. Or any prototype fund. Don't be afraid to put your ideas out there, and don't be afraid to ask for feedback from your friends -- and me! I'd be happy to review your grant application, give you feedback, and help you get your project on its feet with a nice chunk of money. Open source deserves to be paid. You deserve to be in open source! We need you, too.
